1.3 DIVERSITY OF DATA TYPES FOR DATA MINING

As a general technology, data mining can be applied to any kind of data as long as the data are meaningful for a target application. However, different kinds of data may need rather different data mining methodologies, from simple to rather sophisticated, making data mining a rich and diverse field.


STRUCTURED VS. UNSTRUCTURED DATA

Based on whether data have clear structures, we can categorize data as structured vs. unstructured data.

Data stored in relational databases, data cubes, data matrices, and many data warehouses have uniform, record- or table-like structures, defined by their data dictionaries, with a fixed set of attributes (or fields, columns), each with a fixed set of value ranges and semantic meaning. These data sets are typical examples of highly structured data. In many real applications, such strict structural requirement can be relaxed in multiple ways to accommodate semistructured nature of the data, such as to allow a data object to contain a set value, a small set of heterogeneous typed values, or nested structures or to allow the structure of objects or subobjects to be defined flexibly and dynamically (e.g., XML structures).

There are many data sets that may not be as structured as relational tables or data matrices. However, they do have certain structures with clearly defined semantic meaning. For example, a transactional data set may contain a large set of transactions each containing a set of items. A sequence data set may contain a large set of sequences each containing an ordered set of elements that can in turn contain a set of items. Many application data sets, such as shopping transaction data, time-series data, gene or protein data, or Weblog data, belong to this category.

A more sophisticated type of semistructured data set is graph or network data, where a set of nodes are connected by a set of edges (also called links); and each node/link may have its own semantic description or substructures.

Each of such categories of structured and semistructured data sets may have special kinds of patterns or knowledge to be mined and many dedicated data mining methods, such as sequential pattern mining, graph pattern mining, and information network mining methods, have been developed to analyze such data sets.

Beyond such structured or semistructured data, there are also large amounts of unstructured data, such as text data and multimedia (e.g., audio, image, video) data. Although some studies treat them as one-dimensional or multidimensional byte streams, they do carry a lot of interesting semantics. Domain-specific methods have been developed to analyze such data in the fields of natural language understanding, text mining, computer vision, and pattern recognition. Moreover, recent advances on deep learning have made tremendous progress on processing text, image, and video data. Nevertheless, mining hidden structures from unstructured data may greatly help understand and make good use of such data.

The real-world data can often be a mixture of structured data, semistructured data, and unstructured data. For example, an online shopping website may host information for a large set of products, which can be essentially structured data stored in a relational database, with a fixed set of fields on product name, price, specifications, and so on. However, some fields may essentially be text, image, and video data, such as product introduction, expert or user reviews, product images, and advertisement videos. Data mining methods are often developed for mining some particular type of data, and their results can be integrated and coordinated to serve the overall goal.


DATA ASSOCIATED WITH DIFFERENT APPLICATIONS

Different applications may generate or need to handle very different data sets and require rather different data analysis methods. Thus when categorizing data sets for data mining, we should take specific applications into consideration.

Take sequence data as an example. Biological sequences such as DNA or protein sequences may have very different semantic meaning from shopping transaction sequences or Web click streams, calling for rather different sequence mining methods. A special kind of sequence data is time-series data where a time-series may contain an ordered set of numerical values with equal time interval, which is also rather different from shopping transaction sequences, which may not have fixed time gaps (a customer may shop at anytime she likes).

Data in some applications can be associated with spatial information, time information, or both, forming spatial, temporal, and spatiotemporal data, respectively. Special data mining methods, such as spatial data mining, temporal data mining, spatiotemporal data mining, or trajectory pattern mining, should be developed for mining such data sets as well.

For graph and network data, different applications may also need rather different data mining methods. For example, social networks (e.g., Facebook or LinkedIn data), computer communication networks, biological networks, and information networks (e.g., authors linking with keywords) may carry rather different semantics and require different mining methods.

Even for the same data set, finding different kinds of patterns or knowledge may require different data mining methods. For example, for the same set of software (source) programs, finding plagiarized subprogram modules or finding copy-and-paste bugs may need rather different data mining techniques.

Rich data types and diverse application requirements call for very diverse data mining methods. Thus data mining is a rich and fascinating research domain, with lots of new methods waiting to be studied and developed.


STORED VS. STREAMING DATA

Usually, data mining handles finite, stored data sets, such as those stored in various kinds of large data repositories. However, in some applications such as video surveillance or remote sensing, data may stream in dynamically and constantly, as infinite data streams. Mining stream data will require rather different methods than stored data, which may form another interesting theme in our study.
